All right. So, let's start on a demo.
We're going to walk through that actual process of normal forms of taking
a data that is in a non-normal form and
walking all the way through to getting into third normal form.
So, hopefully you need those questions that we had on
third normal form will get cleared up here.
Then from there, you'll actually do an exercise.
So, again we're back in our Jupyter notebooks.
I've opened lesson two demo one creating normalized tables.
So, in this demo,
we're going to walk through the basics of data modelling in normalized form.
We will create tables and Postgres,
insert rows of data,
and do a simple join to show that these tables can all work together.
Because remember and I really might not have stressed it enough earlier,
that when you're getting tables into normal form,
you're going to need to combine those tables.
Just by separating them out doesn't mean that this data isn't related.
It's tightly related.
So, you need to make sure that you can always get your data back in the way,
get all the information from that data with joins.
Again, the ability to do joins is a benefit of using a relational database. All right.
So, we're going to import the library that we're going to use,
the Python driver, so that we can interact with our Postgres database.
So, again mine always pops up with an error just ignore that.
Okay, and again, this is similar to what we were
doing in the previous demos and exercises.
We're going to connect to our database and we're going to get a cursor.
We're going to set our auto commit to true.
This is all the same as yesterday.
Okay. So, let's start here.
We solve this table earlier in the lesson, but let's walk through it.
So, let's imagine we have a table called Music Library.
So, the table name is music library and we have five columns.
Album ID, album name,
artist name, year, and list of songs.
So, let's go to this first row here.
Number one, that's our album ID.
Our album name is Rubber Soul and the artist name was of course the Beatles,
and year, the year that it was released in 1965,
and here's a list of some of the songs that are in that album.
Michelle, think for yourself and in my life.
So, now let's just translate this table
into a simple create table statement and insert the data.
So, this should all feel very familiar to you from yesterday.
So, I'm going to run this code very quickly,
but let's walk through it before we move on.
So, I'm going to create table if it does not exist and I'm going to
model exactly what I saw here in my diagram.
Music library. We're going to have an album ID.
We're going to have that be an int.
An album name which is a varchar,
an artist name which is a varchar,
a year which is an int and a songs,
I called it songs, where it's going to be a list of text.
List of text and again,
we have provided that link to look up the various data types that you may need to use.
So, in this case, we're using a list of strings or text.
So, I'm going to run that in my catch my error if I have an issue.
Then I'm just going to do some simple inserts.
Again, this is just like what we saw yesterday.
So, it should feel comfortable and familiar.
We're going to insert that data into the database.
So, here's our insert statement with music library and our values.
Again, here's the album ID,
album name, artist name,
year, and this is the syntax for how you're going to insert a list of songs.
So, take note of that and we're going to insert those two rows. So, we did that here.
Again, we're going to try to catch the error,
and so then after that,
what we're going to do here is just do a select star on that table to make
sure that our data actually got inserted and it looks the way we thought.
Then from there, again this is just code that will be provided to you.
It just loop through and prints that to screen and remember,
again in Postgres, feel free to do a select star from
a table in NoSQL and Apache Cassandra, you can't do that.
But in Postgre, you're free to do so.
So, here we did. Looks great.
So, let's think about moving that to first normal form.
Again, this data has not been normalized.
To get this data into first normal form,
we need to remove any collections or lists of data.
We need to break up the list and songs into individual rows.
So, in this case, we're going to make a new table called music library two.
We're going to have album ID,
album name, artist name,
year, and song name.
Because we're not going to have a list, we're going to have songs.
So, let's just take this first row.
Album ID again is one,
album name is Rubber Soul.
Artist name is the Beatles,
year 1965, and song name, Michelle.
So, again we're going to just go through it just like we did above.
I'm not going to walk through this because it's just the same,
but we're going to insert into our.
We're going to create the table.
Remember, music library two,
and then we're going to insert all those values.
This looks like a lot of code.
Don't be alarmed. It's all just entering in that data.
These are just simple insert statements.
Let me actually go back here and run it.
Okay, awesome, and then again we're going to do
a select star from that table just to make sure that our data got inserted.
Looks like this is all successful and looks correct, wonderful.
All right. So, let's start talking about moving it to second normal form.
That was easy enough, right?
We just broke up our collections to get it in first normal form.
Moving to second normal form.
We have moved our data to first normal form which is the first step
that's the prerequisite to even thinking about second normal form,
but our table is not yet there in this second normal form.
So, while each of the records in our table is unique right,
each row actually is unique.
Let's go back and look at that chart or our table representation here.
So, we can see that each one of these records is,
or shouldn't say records especially when we're talking about music library.
Each one of these rows is unique.
Except there's as many elements that are duplicated.
Let's keep that in mind. Let's scroll back down here.
So, our primary key in this case,
the album ID is not unique.
Right. We saw that above.
Actually, we had many duplicates, many different columns.
We need to break this up into two tables.
Let's break it up into album library and song library.
So, here we're going to have a table called album library with album ID,
album name, artist name,
and year, and then we're going to have song library with a song ID,
song name, and album ID.
So, now in this case you already see that now we have reduced
the number of duplicates that we had on album ID.
Now, we just have two rows here in this table called new album library and then,
we have our song library which now we've added
a song ID and then the corresponding album ID
that will join with this table to
be able to get rest of this information here and then our song name.
Okay. So, again we're just going to create those tables and insert that data.
Again, looks like a lot of code,
but it's all very straightforward.
Awesome. So, from here,
we're doing a select star on that table.
So, we did for album library and song library.
So, we just printed out the table name to just make it
clear which one that we're showing the information for.
Okay. So, let's do something that we haven't done in
the past and let's do a join on that table,
so that we can get the information that we had in our first table.
Because, let's say I want to be able to know,
I don't just want to do a query on some library.
I wanted to do a query that gets back both my album name,
album ID, the artist name.
We want all of that at one time.
So, do that, you need to do a join.
So, in this case, we're going to do a select star from
our album library and we're going to join it on the song library table.
We're going to join the two tables and what we do when we do a join,
is we need to join those on a particular column.
So, in this case, what they have in column,
pardon me, what they have in common is the album ID.
So, we're going to join on the album ID.
So, album library.album ID equals song library.song id or pardon me album ID.
We're going to run that, and as you can see,
we get back that same information that we had before.
We now have our album ID,
our album name, our artist name,
the year, our song ID.
In this case, I did not remove the other columns,
it just joined both of the tables as
is and so then it's printing the album ID and then the song.
The important thing here is how we're moving
from a table that was not normalized to first normal,
and then to second normal form.
That's the key here.
Moving to third normal form.
Let's check our table for any transitive dependencies.
Album library can now move artist name into its own table called artist.
Which will leave us with three tables.
We are going to make album library two,
which is going to have album ID,
album name, artist ID and year.
We're going to have song library which will have song ID,
song name and album ID and then artist library,
artist ID and name.
So, you can see the representation of the tables here.
So, here's our song table,
our album table, and our artist table.
So, again we're just going to create those tables and then we're going to print them out,
and then we can see that we inserted the data correctly and so from there,
we're going to do two joins so that on all three tables.
So, again, we can get back all the information that we had in the first table.
So, let's do that. So, in this case again,
I'm going to do two joins.
I'm going to select star from artist library and
I'm going to join that with album library two.
I'm going to do that on the,
I'm going to join that with a common column that they both have which is the artist ID.
Then from there, once I've done that join, an inner join,
then I'm going to do this outer join here on the song library on
album library where the album ID column matches.
So, if we do this,
two joins on three tables,
again we'll get back all the information that we originally had in our first table.
Awesome. That looks great.
So, we're all done.
We have normalized our data set.
We have gone all the way from
a denormalized table to a normalized table reducing duplicates all along the way.
So, all about getting that data integrity and reducing the data redundancy.
So, just for the sake of the demo,
we're going to drop the tables.
So, we had a lot of them in this case because we were walking through and then finally,
just again to reiterate,
we're going to make sure that we close our connection to the database.
We're going to close our cursor and close our connection. Awesome.